---
title: Installation
---

Non-python Dependencies
=======================

First we will take care of the external non-python dependencies; then
we\'ll move on to getting our python environment ready.

Unfortunately, annotation necessarily relies on many software packages.
I have worked hard to make dammit rely only on software which is
accessible *and* likely to continue to be so. Most of the dependencies
are available in either Ubuntu PPAs or PyPI, and if not, are trivial to
install manually. If the goal is to make annotation suck less, then
installing the necessary software should suck less too.

Most of this guide will assume you\'re on a Ubuntu system. However, the
dependencies should all run on any flavor of GNU/Linux and on OSX.

First, let\'s get packages from the Ubuntu PPAs:

    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install git ruby hmmer unzip build-essential \
        infernal ncbi-blast+ liburi-escape-xs-perl emboss liburi-perl \
        libsm6 libxrender1 libfontconfig1 parallel

If you\'re on Ubuntu 15.10, you can also install TransDecoder and LAST
through aptitude:

    sudo apt-get install transdecoder last-align

Otherwise, you\'ll need to install them manually. To install
[TransDecoder](https://transdecoder.github.io/) in your home directory,
execute these commands in your terminal:

    cd
    curl -LO https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder/archive/2.0.1.tar.gz
    tar -xvzf 2.0.1.tar.gz
    cd TransDecoder-2.0.1; make
    export PATH=$HOME/TransDecoder-2.0.1:$PATH

To get LAST:

    cd
    curl -LO http://last.cbrc.jp/last-658.zip
    unzip last-658.zip
    cd last-658
    make
    export PATH=$HOME/last-658/src:$PATH
    export PATH=$HOME/last-658/scripts:$PATH

The above commands will only install them for the current session; to
keep it installed, append the exports to your bash profile:

    echo 'export PATH=$HOME/TransDecoder-2.0.1:$PATH' >> $HOME/.bashrc
    echo 'export PATH=$HOME/last-658/src:$PATH' >> $HOME/.bashrc
    echo 'export PATH=$HOME/last-658/scripts:$PATH' >> $HOME/.bashrc

Next, we need to install Conditional Reciprocal Best-hits Blast (CRBB).
The algorithm is described in [Aubry et
al.](http://journals.plos.org/plosgenetics/article?id=10.1371/journal.pgen.1004365),
and is implemented in ruby. Assuming you have ruby (which was installed
above), it can be installed with:

    sudo gem install crb-blast

dammit also runs BUSCO to assess completeness. To install it, run the
following commands:

    cd
    curl -LO http://busco.ezlab.org/v1/files/BUSCO_v1.22.tar.gz 
    tar -xvzf BUSCO_v1.22.tar.gz
    chmod +x BUSCO_v1.22/*.py
    export PATH=$HOME/BUSCO_v1.22:$PATH

\...and once again, to install it permanently:

    echo 'export PATH=$HOME/BUSCO_v1.22:$PATH' >> $HOME/.bashrc

Python Dependencies
===================

dammit is a python package, and relies on a number of commonly-used
scientific libraries. If you\'re sure you have the following python
dependencies already, you can skip this step and move on to the final
stage:

    setuptools>=0.6.35
    pandas>=0.17
    khmer>=2.0
    doit>=0.29.0
    nose==1.3.4
    ficus>=0.1
    matplotlib>=1.0

Otherwise, we will have to install them. Pandas, numpy, and matplotlib
are quite hefty, mostly because they require a lot of compilation. To
get around this, you can either install them via Anaconda, which I
recommend, or you can install those which are available through the
Ubuntu PPAs. If you wish to do things the slow but traditional way, you
can just skip right ahead and:

    pip install -U setuptools
    pip install dammit

Otherwise, proceed to the Anaconda instructions, or skip ahead to the
hybrid `Ubuntu-instructions`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}.

Anaconda
--------

Anaconda (or miniconda) is the preferred distribution for dammit. It\'s
straightforward to install and saves a lot of time compiling things when
creating new environments. To install it on Ubuntu, first download it:

    cd
    curl -OL https://3230d63b5fc54e62148e-c95ac804525aac4b6dba79b00b39d1d3.ssl.cf1.rackcdn.com/Anaconda2-4.0.0-Linux-x86_64.sh

And run the installer:

    bash Anaconda2-2.4.0-Linux-x86_64.sh -b
    echo 'export PATH=$HOME/anaconda2/bin:$PATH' >> $HOME/.bashrc

Select [yes]{.title-ref} when prompted on adding it to your
[.bashrc]{.title-ref}, and resource your profile to gain access to it:

    source .bashrc

The version of Sphinx which is shipped with Anaconda has issues; we will
remove it and allow dammit to install its own version via PyPI:

    conda remove sphinx

Get the latest versions of some packages:

    conda update pandas numexpr

Ubuntu / Pip Instructions {#Ubuntu-instructions}
-------------------------

If you\'d prefer to not use Anaconda, are on a clean Ubuntu 14.04
machine, have not installed the python packages with pip, and have
installed the non-python dependencies, you can install them through the
Ubuntu PPAs as follows:

    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install python-pip python-dev python-numpy 

Unfortunately, you\'ll still have to install Pandas through pip, as the
versions in the Ubuntu 14.04 PPAs are quite old. These will be installed
automatically along with dammit.

Dammit {#dammit-instructions}
------

dammit itself is quite easy to install. Just run:

    pip install -U setuptools   
    pip install dammit

If you\'re not running anaconda or a virtual environment, you\'ll have
to put a [sudo]{.title-ref} before pip to install it globally. If you
don\'t already have a recent versions of Pandas and scikit-learn this
will take a bit.

When you\'re done, run the check again to make sure everything was
installed correctly:

    dammit dependencies

And you\'re ready to go!
