---
title: Usage
---

If you\'re looking for a quick start, head over to the
[tutorial](tutorial.html). This page has more complete usage information
and a better breakdown of the functionality.

Dependencies
============

dammit has three components. The first, [dependencies]{.title-ref},
checks whether you have the dependencies installed correctly and warns
you if not. It is run with:

    dammit dependencies

There isn\'t much to this command; either you have the dependencies or
you don\'t. If you don\'t, there are instructions for getting them on
the [installation](installation.html) page.

Databases
=========

The next component is the [databases]{.title-ref} subcommand. This
handles all of dammit\'s external data; the documentation can be found
[here](databases.html).

Annotation
==========

The [annotate]{.title-ref} command runs the BUSCO assessment, assembly
stats, and homology searches, aggregates the results, and outputs a GFF3
file and annotation report. It takes the `--full`, `--database-dir`, and
`--busco-group` options in the same manner as the
[databases]{.title-ref} command. Additionally, it can specify an
optional output directory, the number of threads to use with threaded
subprograms like HMMER, and a list of user-supplied protein databases in
FASTA format. A simple invocation with the default databases would look
like:

    dammit annotate <transcriptome.fasta>

While a more complex invocation might look like:

    dammit annotate <transcriptome.fasta> --database-dir /path/to/dbs --busco-group vertebrata --n_threads 4 --user-databases whale.pep.fasta dolphin.pep.fasta

User databases will be searched with CRBB; this runs
[blastx]{.title-ref}, so if you supply ridiculously huge databases, it
*will* take a long time. Future versions will use LAST for all searches
to improve performance, but for now, we\'re stuck with the NCBI\'s
dinosaur. Also note that the information from the deflines in your
databases will be used to construct the GFF3 file, so if your databases
lack useful IDs, your annotations will too.
